doc/config-debugging.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later

Debugging options
=================

In case the resolver crashes, it is often helpful to collect a coredump from
the crashed process. Configuring the system to collect coredump from crashed
process is out of the scope of this documentation, but some tips can be found
`here <https://lists.nic.cz/pipermail/knot-resolver-users/2019/000239.html>`_.

Kresd uses *assumptions*, which are checks that should always pass and indicate
some weird or unexpected state if they don't. In such cases, they show up in
the log as errors. By default, the process recovers from those states if possible, but the
behaviour can be changed with the following options to aid further debugging.

.. envvar:: debugging.assumption_abort = false|true

   :return: boolean (default: false in meson's release mode, true otherwise)

   Allow the process to be aborted in case it encounters a failed assumption.
   (Some critical conditions always lead to abortion, regardless of settings.)

.. envvar:: debugging.assumption_fork = milliseconds

   :return: int (default: 5 minutes in meson's release mode, 0 otherwise)

   If a proccess should be aborted, it can be done in two ways. When this is
   set to nonzero (default), a child is forked and aborted to obtain a coredump,
   while the parent process recovers and keeps running. This can be useful to
   debug a rare issue that occurs in production, since it doesn't affect the
   main process.

   As the dumping can be costly, the value is a lower bound on delay between
   consecutive coredumps of each process.  It is randomized by +-25% each time.

Commit message:

treewide: rename assumptions to kr_assert() / kr_fails_assert()
To (hopefully) improve readability, rename the typical macro usage of:

    if (!kr_assume(x)) y; // to
    if (kr_fails_assert(x)) y;

As a convenience, replace the assert without a return value to a more
simple version:

    (void)!kr_assume(x);  // becomes
    kr_assert(x);

doc/config-debugging.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later

Debugging options
=================

In case the resolver crashes, it is often helpful to collect a coredump from
the crashed process. Configuring the system to collect coredump from crashed
process is out of the scope of this documentation, but some tips can be found
`here <https://lists.nic.cz/pipermail/knot-resolver-users/2019/000239.html>`_.

Kresd uses its own mechanism for assertions. They are checks that should always
pass and indicate some weird or unexpected state if they don't. In such cases,
they show up in the log as errors. By default, the process recovers from those
states if possible, but the behaviour can be changed with the following options
to aid further debugging.

.. envvar:: debugging.assertion_abort = false|true

   :return: boolean (default: false in meson's release mode, true otherwise)

   Allow the process to be aborted in case it encounters a failed assertion.
   (Some critical conditions always lead to abortion, regardless of settings.)

.. envvar:: debugging.assertion_fork = milliseconds

   :return: int (default: 5 minutes in meson's release mode, 0 otherwise)

   If a proccess should be aborted, it can be done in two ways. When this is
   set to nonzero (default), a child is forked and aborted to obtain a coredump,
   while the parent process recovers and keeps running. This can be useful to
   debug a rare issue that occurs in production, since it doesn't affect the
   main process.

   As the dumping can be costly, the value is a lower bound on delay between
   consecutive coredumps of each process.  It is randomized by +-25% each time.
